Beer cost, but most of the hard liquor was $4. Well,
it was $3 to $4. The better brands, Sheva's Ribbon
was $4. And that was for, you know, the big bottle.
And I'm not sure which it was in the fifth or fourth
quart, but even then that was a good price. And he
hung around the officer's club.
Nobody had a, we didn't really have living rooms.
The men, the male officers, I think all of those who
just had those living areas had patios or
something attached. The men had built and made
some sort of a recreation area. The women didn't,
at least not where I was. Something else that needs
to be said. What I'm saying, what I'm telling are my
experiences and the way it was at my hospital. The
hospitals were not standard. They were laid out
differently. The hospital areas were, living
situations were different wherever
you went.
We felt pretty lucky to have women, felt pretty
lucky to have individual rooms and indoor
vitrines.
We had a hairdresser in the back of our officer's
club. And really, you know, this was on Longman
Post, which was very large, and there was just all
kinds of things there. There were two hospitals.
There were all sorts of headquarters. There were a
lot of Well, there was a WAC detachment not very far
from us. There were a lot of civilian women there,
Department of the Army civilians. And so, you
know, there was a real need for women's
facilities.
And it was a Vietnamese man, obviously
French-trained, If we had any length to our hair at
all, he had us looking like Marie Antoinette, lots
of big curls, this upswept kind of thing. So we had
our hair done. I was a manicurist. I had nails for
the first time in my life. She did pedicures. off of
that, you know, when things were slow on the ward
and
took off my combat boots and had my toenails done in
addition to the rest of them. But that isn't, you
know, what it was like every place. Not every place
had a, you know, a rare team attached. So treating
many, you know, respiratory patients was
difficult in many places.
We had nice big hospital beds throughout most of
the hospital. And it wasn't true when I got there,
but we eventually got them. And they didn't have
running water on the wards when I got there, but
they were in the process of putting it in. So we had
hot and cold running water very soon. And had
showers on them. on the wards for the patients.
We soon had air conditioning. I heard tales about
how miserable it was before air conditioning,
especially for the guys in full body casts or half
body casts.
So they had gone for some time without that. The
women's quarters were eventually updated.
Everybody got a ceiling and the whole, you know,
each hooch was air-conditioned, central
air-conditioned. So things were different. It
just depended on where you were and when you were.
And were you involved with the MedCap program? I
never went out. I knew about him. I was afraid to put
myself in danger. And it wasn't just that I
physically was afraid. I don't remember shaking
my boots thinking about it. But my parents were...
I didn't... Well, I knew they would not take
something happening to me very well. And my
brother at the time was 1A. Now he eventually got
that changed, but he was flunking out of school and
lost his deferment. And then the other thing was I
lost a boyfriend over there just before I went. So I
was very much aware of what a family went through. I
went from his wake, from the funeral home, to the
airplane in St. Louis that would take me out to the
West Coast.
report call was such that I had to leave. I couldn't
stay until the next day. So I didn't go to his
funeral.
But I was afraid to get out, you know, in the
countryside. I didn't like the idea, I told you, of
flying up anywhere by chopper or going over land. I
knew it was dangerous. Did many civilians come to
the base? They had a lot of Vietnamese workers.
Everybody worked in our laundry, in our kitchen.
There were a few people who worked on the wards.
There was a translator or two, probably more.
There were stretcher bearers assigned to the
emergency room.
That was just our hospital.
Over the whole post. One of the first things I
remember about being in country, got in there at
nighttime, but I think it was when I was bused from
the replacement center, which was at Benoit,
which was just adjacent to Long Bend Post. From
there over to the hospital. I remember turning a
corner and noticing these people stooped over
working on the ditches and pouring concrete and
all this stuff. And then looking again and
realizing it was women.
There weren't any men to do that work. It was women.
They were down to women. What were your feelings
about the Vietnamese people? They changed over
time.
I'm always unsettled when I can't speak to
somebody and we used a few words over and over and
over to get things across.
It was frustrating trying to work with them
because they didn't understand. Now what And
later on, as my tour continued and ended, I found
myself thinking of them and even calling them
goofs. And I felt bad at the time.
I felt worse later.
I think it was... You know, it's hard to translate
at the time and remember what's going on and what
has gone on in their lives, or even to know, really,
what they've been through. So many of them, so
often when we took patients on recovery, on pre-op
rather, when they came in, when one of the
Vietnamese came in as a casualty, they often came
in with two or three family members. And they were a
bother. We had to remember to order meal trays for
them, which they didn't like. We didn't usually
have meal trays on the pre-op recovery.
They, you know, they were in the way.
They struck you as not
being very bright.
That wasn't it at all. They couldn't understand
you. They were numbed by what had gone on. They were
there with their family member because maybe they
wouldn't see him again.
There wasn't much attempt. I mean, we picked up
Vietnamese casualties, civilian casualties, as
we could. I don't know how often or how much of the
time they went out of their way to bring in civilian
casualties, but we got a good number of them.
But you always had the time element and the
communication factor. And patients, we often did
the emergency surgery for them. And then the next
day or the day after, they would be sent to a
provincial hospital over in Benoit. And then you
just wondered where they ever did end up. And if
those people being picked up 30 miles away and
brought into Long Bend, had any idea where Long
Bend was or if they were ever told. So they had to
come along. And then they were, you know,
certainly further, I think, abused just by the
whole system.
Big people, I mean, we are big compared to those
people. And, you know, we... maybe and maybe not
looked kindly at them.
Later on, when I was on a different ward, a medical
ward, we still had Vietnamese patients there. We
got closer to them. There was more of a rapport. I
remember thinking of them more as people
than I did the ones we took care of on pre-op and
recovery. There was a lot of shuffling of people.
But when we had them for a length of time, And under
circumstances that were a lot more normal, we
weren't dealing with smashed people. But on the
medical ward, I certainly found it easier to feel
more humanely toward them. We had a little girl,
four or five, who had a tracheostomy that had been
put in by a French doctor. Her grandmother did
speak French, and she was with her. cute little
thing. It really was a doll, just easy to love, love
back.
This thing had been done, oh, the wrong kind of a
tube had been put in. It was a closed-in tube. And
she, you know, usually, she couldn't get rid of the
mucus in her lungs very easily, and she developed
pneumonia, and that's when we got her. And there
was an attempt made to to revise that to see what was
wrong with her, why she needed the tracheostomy.
We couldn't get a real good story. And it turned out
there was some sort of a tumor, a benign kind of
tumor, but it would continue to grow and occlude
her airway. And she would always have to have the
tracheostomy. So there was that attempt to... not
just take care of her, but do something better for
her. And for a while, she needed an oxygen tent, and
we didn't have such a thing. And so the corpsman
rigged one up, and it was the most gosh-awful
looking thing you've ever seen. They had her in a
big baby bed, kind of a bed, and had rigged There was
clear plastic. They had clear plastic all around
her. But to get the steam, they had just this series
of stuff, you know, bottles and tubes and all this.
And it made a lot of noise. But it worked. And, you
know, the guys were tickled to do that and to be
around her. And they liked her mama's song, too.
Grandma was very pleasant company.
And there were others. you know, that made a mark on
us. And that I hope we made a mark on more so than
places where we put people to die, you know, back
in the corner and left them, you know. And how did
your peers act towards the Vietnamese?
There were some who... you know, who were really
fine toward them, and others who weren't.
I came away, well, I went thinking I wasn't
prejudiced. I had not grown up around any ethnic
minority, and
had encountered blacks in St. Louis when I was in
school. And it was nothing but a positive
experience. I wasn't buddy-buddy friends with
any black person. But later on, I think I
understood how easily you can become prejudiced
and biased, and that you can read things into a
person's behavior, certainly read it wrong, and
judge them very badly. You really do need to know
why they have this dull, dumb look on their faces.
There's a real reason. If I'd gone through the kind
of trauma they'd gone through, I'd have a dull
look, too. Probably chronically depressed.
These are people who have grown up for
generations.
in warfare, just trying to eke out a living and stay
alive no matter how. And
there was not a lot of high-minded niceness in
them. Or it, you know, it hadn't been there for a
while, or they didn't have many opportunities for
it to show.
And did you take any kind of precautions against
BC, or was it not a big threat? It was not a big threat
on Long Bend. On the hospital grounds, all the
buildings were bunkered outside with barrels
that were filled with something, dirt or rocks or
something. And then on top of the barrels would be
two or three layers of sandbags. There had been
some true bunkers dug into the ground and then
bunkered over areas like
tornado shelters. But they were out back behind,
you'd have to walk a distance to get to them. It's
like being in a tornado. You want to get yourself
down and flat and out of the open area as soon as
possible. So to go from a building to a bunker, you
could be hurt on the way. So they felt it was best
to... and just bunker the buildings. And what we
were to do in the case of alerts, we were to get down
on the ground. In our rooms, we were to get under the
beds, put our steel pots on, get under the beds. And
on the wards,
we were to get our patients on the floor and then put
their mattress on top of them. And they'd have the
steel frame of the bed over that.
We
had some incoming shells we were fired on a few
times, and I was really only aware of it one time. I
slept through a lot. And then I think our
particular compound, this place was so big, the
whole post wouldn't be hit at the same time. And I
didn't know it until much later, but our hospital
was fairly close to the ammo dump, a big ammo dump
that served probably a huge area. And there were
twin towers, radio towers or something, not far
away. And the story was that the BC used those
towers to sight in on the ammo dump. which wasn't
that far from us. So I think we're in more potential
danger than a lot of us realized. And then I found
out later, after I left, sometime in the next six
months, some of our buildings were hit and
damaged.
The one time that I was aware that I'd gone to bed
fairly early, it was a time when things were going
on in our... Officer's Club had been told to close
down early. And I'd had plenty to drink. I was...
Well, I was still awake and functioning because I
went home. I showered and rolled up my hair before
going to bed. And then I was awakened around
midnight, and the gal trying to wake me up had a hard
time, and my door was locked. She couldn't come in
and get me. So I finally did get up, And I was groggy.
I kind of knew what was going on, but not really. And
I put my steel pot on, and it wouldn't fit over my
hair rollers. That worried me a little bit. I laid
down in the corner. I couldn't get under my bed,
either, with all this on my hair. I didn't have the
presence of mind to take my rollers out. So I just
got down in the corner on the floor, in the corner
formed by my bed, and I had a refrigerator. And I
sort of set the helmet over my head. And then I did
worry because I worried, but I didn't do anything
about it. I had a big oscillating fan. on top of the
refrigerator. It was one of those things with a big
wide open spring. Big enough you could just put
your whole hand into it. And
I did think, I hope nothing hits too close to us
because if it does it will knock that fan down on top
of me and chew me up. But I didn't do anything. The
next morning I had to work and I had a headache. I
didn't often drink to the point I had a hangover.
That was unusual for me. But I had a hangover that
day, and I felt bad, and my head hurt. And I went to
work, and the ward was a mess. It was just an
absolute mess, because they had all gone on red
alert also, and the patients were on the floor. And
usually, everyone wakes up around 5. They turn the
lights on on the ward at 5 and start taking
temperatures and vital signs and making guys get
up and shower and make their beds and all this
stuff. But I guess the night had been so crazy that
no one was waking up on time. And so they were just
getting up, and there was a little nest under the
nurse's station desk where the nurse had fallen
asleep. And things were just messy, and they were
trying to be organized and so on. And a fellow came
in on the ward, came onto the ward that I knew. He was
a guy I had known in El Paso before I'd been Station
in Vietnam. And I'd seen him a few times. He was over
there with a team that was testing a new, field
testing a new weapon. It was a Vulcan. It's called a
Vulcan. It's a Gatling gun, and it had been mounted
on an Army personnel carrier, an APC. They hadn't
been done before, so they were trying it out. And I
had seen some other guys, from that team just about
once. One of them I had known in El Paso, too. And
Jimmy came over to tell me that one of these guys had
been killed that night. And not very far from the
hospital, there was a
BOQ, an officer's quarters area, just two or three
blocks from our compound. And that's where they
stayed when they came on to post. And this fellow
had stood outside, outside the bunker. They did
have a bunker. Watching all the, you know, the
firefights, the lights and everything going on.
And he was killed by a shell fragment and it just
went into his chest and took him immediately. Just
instantly. And, you know, I felt very bad. I knew he
had a wife and a couple of kids at home. And young,
nice guy. And do you know my headache left? The
hangover was gone.
I wouldn't have thought, I didn't expect the
psychological effects of a hangover to be, you
know, to override the physical effects. Okay.
Were you aware of any relationships among
Vietnamese men and American
women? No. No, that's a mix I didn't hear about.
Okay. And was racism a problem? Once in a while you
were aware of it.
There were a few of the black enlisted men who wore
chains with black clenched fists on them.
We had one fellow, a lot of the wards did this, ours I
don't think as much as some others. But they would
hang flags from people's home states. They had a
big expanse of ceiling in these Quonset huts. And a
lot of people would bring their home flag. And one
of our doctors had brought the rebel flag, the
Confederate battle flag. And it was hanging right
across from where we had put this fellow in bed. He
was a black fellow.
And he was very upset about that. And he was kind of
loud about being upset. And, you know, you just had
the feeling, uh-oh, troublemaker. And we moved
him to the other ward. The medical ward was two
wards. And we just moved him around to the other
side. I think we did take the flag down, too. I don't
remember whether we took it down before we moved
him or not, but I know that black did go down. And he
was a model patient. He was fine. But the fellas,
you know, they were aware of it. Another thing, one
of my corpsmen
was a black fellow, young. This kid, I never knew
how much I could believe. He was real charming and
personable and would just tell the wildest
stories. And he claimed he was only 17 when he came
into Vietnam. And it was hard, you know, it's hard
to tell a young kid that age, you know, when he's 17
to 19. You might,
you know, tell younger, but you can't really tell.
And he told amazing stories about what he had done
before he had come to Vietnam. He'd grown up on the
streets in New Jersey, and he was a tough guy. Or
he'd have you believe he was. And he came to us as a
corpsman after having been in the boonies as an
infantryman for several months, probably six
months. And he told me... He just couldn't stand it
any longer. He couldn't stand the killing any
longer, and he begged and begged, and
occasionally this did happen, that fellows were
rotated, you know, people who had no prior medical
training were rotated into the hospitals, and
they got OJT as corpsmen, as medical corpsmen. And
he told that
there was that There were racial problems out in
the field. And he said that the Vietnamese, that
they had a choice of firing on brothers or white
guys or a group that had a lot of white guys. They
picked the white guys rather than firing on the
brothers. And seemed to say that there was, you
know, an understanding there. I never heard it
from anyone else. And as I say, this guy, you know,
well, you know, he had given me cause to doubt his
truthfulness at times. That was hard because he
was, you know, he was a fun, sweet kid. But, you
know, I just don't
know. And was sexism a problem?
Well, yes and no. uh, sexism as it, uh, there was a
lot going on then. I wasn't aware of the women's
movement, was not involved with it or think it. I
needed to be a part of it for a long time because I was
just being very selfish. I was, uh, a woman, uh, uh,
army officer. I was a nurse. And being in the Army
Nurse Corps is a lot different from being in the
Women's Army Corps, the WACs. No wax now. There's
no women's army corps. But it was special being a
woman in the nurse corps. And we were treated with a
great deal of respect and courtesy.
This was all, I think, well much of it was true, much
of it was just on the surface. There was resentment
among male nurses toward female nurses. At that
time, male nurses had not been officers long
enough to have gained any superiority
in rank. I knew a couple of majors, and I believe one
became a lieutenant colonel when I was there. A
lieutenant colonel was about as high as men were at
the time. So there was hard feelings there.
I think we enjoyed the privileges we had.
For the most part, we really enjoyed them. The guys
were eager to do things for us.
There were a lot who wanted something in return.
One of the things, and I don't think this was done
consciously, but
when the guys had a chance to be around one of us,
they opened up. They spilled their guts. They just
told us everything. They confided in us. It was
mother confessed her. It was sister. It was... you
know, girlfriend, all rode in to one.
They didn't do that to me. Going over, this was a
23-hour flight with two stops.
I had managed to miss my port call through not
knowing just how long it was going to take to get
from San Francisco Airport out to Travis and how I
had to get there and so on. There was no direct bus,
surprisingly. And so I missed it by about 20
minutes. And so I spent about two and a half days at
Travis Airport Space waiting to go over. And when I
did, I was the only woman on the plane and the only
officer on the plane. Well, being the only officer
didn't count because I was a nurse. And nurses were
not to command. We were never to be in command
situations, even if we were the only officer. But I
was really the senior person. There were nine
NCOs.
They were all young. The oldest one was under 30. I
was 23. And he had just made Sergeant First Class,
and no experience as, you know, Sergeant First
Class in any big situation. And in the course of
that flight, we were put in the front of the plane
that was partitioned off from the back, and the
front had about ten seats in it. It would be like the
first class section, except it was not first
class. We were just as packed as the guys in the
back. We were just separated. And so I was put up
there with them. And during that trip, every
single one of those guys sat with me sometime or
other. They just played musical chairs.
And I heard every guy's story. Every single one.
And the senior NCO was real nervous about being
senior and worried about just everything. He was
very open about it, talked a lot about his wife and
so on. Well, the tradition was, or the practice
was, as much as possible, when you got to Hawaii,
you got off and got a bottle. if at all possible. And
he had talked to guys and, you know, somebody knew
how to do this and still get back on the plane. Now,
we all got off the plane and had the opportunity to
go into the bar. But, you know, the deal was to get a
bottle and bring it back on. And so he told me how he
planned to do this and so on. And I was included in
it, you know, so that when he did get on and he got
back with just minutes to spare, it wasn't a matter
of going into... you know, the airport gift shop.
You had to get a cab and go into town or go along the
strip, you know, several miles away. And we were
only on the ground for about two hours. He got there
just in the nick of time. And then I hid the bottle
behind me because, you know, would you do this?
Because the stewardess would never suspect you.
And so then we just, you know, passed little drinks
around and nobody... Nobody, I don't think,
wanted to at that point. It was just something they
had to do. They had to go through this ritual of
securing the bottle. But it was funny how they all
just bounced around, you know.
But that got to be old hat after a while. And, you
know, we came to resent it, you know, at some point
or another. I caused a fight in an officer's club
one night because of it. I went in and had some
sewing or mending, something to do, and didn't
want to do it in my room. I did not want to be alone. I
didn't want to interact with anybody, but I wanted
people around, and that was all we had as a living
room place to go. And this character would not
leave me alone. He'd had too much, and he was kind of
weaving a bit, and eventually somebody came over
and stepped in, but He was loud, and it almost came
to fisticuffs between these two.
And how did the doctors treat you? We were treated
well. They wanted people who could do their job
around them. They wanted well-trained nurses.
And if that's what you were, they treated you very
well. And if you weren't... Then you were treated
that way. You
were just kind of... I had a young nurse on the
medical ward who was very young and very immature.
And just kind of seemed to be in la-la land, you
know. And she did what she was told. For the most
part, she reported what she needed to report. But
she was just not grown up. And that's the way she was
treated.
How did you feel when you came home?
Well, I was suffering culture shock without
really naming it. I wanted to leave. I was really
eager to leave. I got here and I wanted to go back. I
didn't want to stay. There was nothing here for me.
I didn't really want to talk about what I'd been
through. I would have answered questions. And for
the most part, people didn't ask.
And I didn't want to bring them up. I went to work in a
civilian hospital in New Orleans. And I didn't
realize at the time, but New Orleans was really way
It was really in the dark ages as far as nursing was
concerned.
The chief nurses were running around in starched
uniforms. I hadn't seen uniforms that starched
even in college. Only one of the nurses in the
nursing service office had even a bachelor's
degree. Her bachelor's was in education. So these
were just diploma trained nurses, you know,
senior of course, and very much concerned with
keeping things the way they were. They were just
beginning to do team nursing. It's what they
called team nursing, but it was not team nursing,
and that was really the being in thing at the time.
Team nursing was fun. I was looking forward to
doing that again, because we had not done it in the
Army. We weren't staffed on each ward enough to do
it. And
there were, as I was being oriented at that
hospital, three black women nurses were pointed
out to me. And they were all very recent graduates.
They were just, you know, that year's crop. from a
local black university. Is it Dillard or is it
Howard? I don't know. But there's a large black
university in New Orleans. And they were
graduating with a degree, Bachelor of Science
degree, nurses. And this was the first time any of
them had been hired by this hospital. Boy, were
they watching them. And so far, they're turning
out just fine. But it was, you know, they didn't
expect them to, and they didn't want them to. I
mean, that's where I really encountered racism.
You know, what was very blatant.
Coming home. When I went to work there, I worked in a
recovery room. And a couple or three times I said
something about, oh, you know the way we did this in
Vietnam. They were not interested.
You know, I would have thought, I would have been
interested in that. We had to... We had a very
peculiar way of giving, or I thought it was
peculiar, way of giving packed red cells to
patients. We had no centrifuge, so there was no way
of spinning down a unit of blood.
They would just set the unit out to settle. And then
you'd send your most sure-footed corpsman over to
the lab to get it, and you'd very, very carefully
hang it. You know, you had to stick your tubing in
and not jostle this. We did have plastic bags. It
was plastic bags that the blood was in. And then you
had to be careful watching it. I mean, you know,
watch it carefully as it went in. Make sure you got
it or you stopped it when the red cells were in. And,
you know, it's not a problem. Great story, but I
mean, you know, it fits a battle situation. And
you'd think people would, you know, be polite at
least to you as you told the story, and, you know,
they weren't. They didn't want to hear it.
We had to hold on to patients longer than we should
have at times because of the... medevac
procedures. The Air Force did the air back. It was
their planes, their personnel, their nurses and
everything who carried patients out of country,
well even up country, like to the in-country
convalescent center at Cameron Bay. So the Air
Force wrote the rules and these were, you know, big
airliners pressurized to like
you know, our passenger airplanes are. And even
pressurized at altitude, they are still
pressurized only to about 6,000 feet. You know,
you get somebody who is anemic, has a heart
condition or whatever, and take them up to Denver,
and they can get into trouble. That's 5,000 feet.
So the patients did have to be stable. They had to
have a certain red blood count before the Air Force
would let them on the plane. On the medical ward, we
got a lot of patients who had hemolytic anemia.
And they were very depleted. Well, most of the
patients like that were Vietnamese or
Thai. There was only one airbag flight to Bangkok a
week. So if you didn't get your Thai patient on the
plane on Monday, you had him until next Monday. And
again, it was a matter of, and these people, by the
time they were ready for airbag home, were not
feeling too bad. They would have gotten up and left
if they could have gotten away with it. They hated
our food. They didn't understand our bathroom
facilities. They couldn't communicate with us. I
don't remember any word out of Thai that I learned,
any Thai word that I learned. I did learn, you know,
a few Vietnamese words and phrases, but I don't
remember any Thai. And we came to, oh, we couldn't
stand the Thai patients. The other thing about the
Thais was they would be visited by great numbers of
their friends. And always before coming in to
visit a friend, they would stop at RPX and buy out
the place. What a greedy, selfish lot. But anyway,
a little thing like not having enough red blood
cells, you know, we'd keep one of those guys with us
for another week. So it was important to, you know,
we would give them a transfusion the night before.
And again, you know, nobody was interested in that
story. So I soon learned not to talk about it. And,
uh, And looking back, you know, I should have been
talking about it. I should have been talking about
it to my family. I should have somehow let them know
that it was all right to ask me questions.
I remember at Christmas, you know, really, not at
Christmas, but holidays as they came out. New
Year's certainly had been fun over there. And, you
know, I wasn't stepping into it. any sort of a
circle of friends back home that was going to party
on New Year's.
It was just complete culture shock. And I went, you
know, back into civilian nursing, and that made it
worse. And the particular kind of civilian
nursing, it was not. The Army has a very high level
of nursing. I didn't appreciate that at the time
until I got out, but it really does. High
educational standards, and... You know, I was
going to the Dark Ages, plus the prejudice. And the
other thing that had gone on just shortly before I
came home, the whole Milo scandal broke. And even
though I had nothing to do with that, was not even in
the area where the Americal Division operated,
wasn't part of any of that, I was part of the Army.